

THE great fame of Isaeus had already preceded him here; but we find him
even more wonderful than we had heard. He possesses the utmost
readiness, copiousness, and abundance of language: he always speaks
extempore, and his lectures are as finished as though he had spent a
long time over their written composition. His style is Greek, or rather
the genuine Attic. His exordiums are terse, elegant, attractive, and
occasionally impressive and majestic. He suggests several subjects for
discussion, allows his audience their choice, sometimes to even name
which side he shall take, rises, arranges himself, and begins. At once
he has everything almost equally at command. Recondite meanings of
things are suggested to you, and words--what words they are! exquisitely
chosen and polished. These extempore speeches of his show the wideness
of his reading, and how much practice he has had in composition. His
preface is to the point, his narrative lucid, his summing up forcible,
his rhetorical ornament imposing. In a word, he teaches, entertains, and
affects you; and you are at a loss to decide which of the three he does
best. His reflections are frequent, his syllogisms also are frequent,
condensed, and carefully finished, a result not easily attainable even
with the pen. As for his memory, you would hardly believe what it is
capable of. He repeats from a long way back what he has previously
delivered extempore, without missing a single word. This marvellous
faculty he has acquired by dint of great application and practice, for
night and day he does nothing, hears nothing, says nothing else. He has
passed his sixtieth year and is still only a rhetorician, and I know no
class of men more single-hearted, more genuine, more excellent than this
class. We who have to go through the rough work of the bar and of real
disputes unavoidably contract a certain unprincipled adroitness. The
school, the lecture-room, the imaginary case, all this, on the other
hand, is perfectly innocent and harmless, and equally enjoyable,
especially to old people, for what can be happier at that time of life
than to enjoy what we found pleasantest in our young days? I consider
Isaeus then, not only the most eloquent, but the happiest, of men, and
if you are not longing to make his acquaintance, you must be made of
stone and iron. So, if not upon my account, or for any other reason,
come, for the sake of hearing this man, at least. Have you never read of
a certain inhabitant of Cadiz who was so impressed with the name and
fame of Livy that he came from the remotest corner of the earth on
purpose to see him, and, his curiosity gratified, went straight home
again. It is utter want of taste, shows simple ignorance, is almost an
actual disgrace to a man, not to set any high value upon a proficiency
in so pleasing, noble, refining a science. "I have authors," you will
reply, "here in my own study, just as eloquent." True: but then those
authors you can read at any time, while you cannot always get the
opportunity of hearing eloquence. Besides, as the proverb says, "The
living voice is that which sways the soul;" yes, far more. For
notwithstanding what one reads is more clearly understood than what one
hears, yet the utterance, countenance, garb, aye and the very gestures
of the speaker, alike concur in fixing an impression upon the mind; that
is, unless we disbelieve the truth of Aeschines' statement, who, after
he had read to the Rhodians that celebrated speech of Demosthenes, upon
their expressing their admiration of it, is said to have added, "Ah!
what would you have said, could you have heard the wild beast himself?"
And Aeschines, if we may take Demosthenes' word for it, was no mean
elocutionist; yet, he could not but confess that the speech would have
sounded far finer from the lips of its author. I am saying all this with
a view to persuading you to hear Isaeus, if even for the mere sake of
being able to say you have heard him. Farewell.


