

GIVE me a penny, and I will tell you a story "worth gold," or, rather,
you shall hear two or three; for one brings to my mind another. It makes
no difference with which I begin. Verania, the widow of Piso, the Piso,
I mean, whom Galba adopted, lay extremely ill, and Regulus paid her a
visit. By the way, mark the assurance of the man, visiting a lady who
detested him herself, and to whose husband he was a declared enemy! Even
barely to enter her house would have been bad enough, but he actually
went and seated himself by her bed-side and began enquiring on what day
and hour she was born. Being informed of these important particulars, he
composes his countenance, fixes his eyes, mutters something to himself,
counts upon his fingers, and all this merely to keep the poor sick lady
in suspense. When he had finished, "You are," he says, "in one of your
climacterics; however, you will get over it. But for your greater
satisfaction, I will consult with a certain diviner, whose skill I have
frequently experienced." Accordingly off he goes, performs a sacrifice,
and returns with the strongest assurances that the omens confirmed what
he had promised on the part of the stars. Upon this the good woman,
whose danger made her credulous, calls for her will and gives Regulus a
legacy. She grew worse shortly after this; and in her last moments
exclaimed against this wicked, treacherous, and worse than perjured
wretch, who had sworn falsely to her by his own son's life. But
imprecations of this sort are as common with Regulus as they are
impious; and he continually devotes that unhappy youth to the curse of
those gods whose vengeance his own frauds every day provoke.

Velleius Blaesus, a man of consular rank, and remarkable for his immense
wealth, in his last illness was anxious to make some alterations in his
will. Regulus, who had lately endeavoured to insinuate himself into his
good graces, hoped to get something from the new will, and accordingly
addresses himself to his physicians, and conjures them to exert all
their skill to prolong the poor man's life. But after the will was
signed, he changes his character, reversing his tone: "How long," says
he to these very same physicians, "do you intend keeping this man in
misery? Since you cannot preserve his life, why do you grudge him the
happy release of death?" Blaesus dies, and, as if he had overheard every
word that Regulus had said, has not left him one farthing.--And now have
you had enough? or are you for the third, according to rhetorical canon?
If so, Regulus will supply you. You must know, then, that Aurelia, a
lady of remarkable accomplishments, purposing to execute her will,[44]
had put on her smartest dress for the occasion. Regulus, who was present
as a witness, turned to the lady, and "Pray," says he, "leave me these
fine clothes." Aurelia thought the man was joking: but he insisted upon
it perfectly seriously, and, to be brief, obliged her to open her will,
and insert the dress she had on as a legacy to him, watching as she
wrote, and then looking over it to see that it was all down correctly.
Aurelia, however, is still alive: though Regulus, no doubt, when he
solicited this bequest, expected to enjoy it pretty soon. The fellow
gets estates, he gets legacies, conferred upon him, as if he really
deserved them! But why should I go on dwelling upon this in a city where
wickedness and knavery have, for this time past, received, the same, do
I say, nay, even greater encouragement, than modesty and virtue? Regulus
is a glaring instance of this truth, who, from a state of poverty, has
by a train of villainies acquired such immense riches that he once told
me, upon consulting the omens to know how soon he should be worth sixty
millions of sesterces,[45] he found them so favourable as to portend he
should possess double that sum. And possibly he may, if he continues to
dictate wills for other people in this way: a sort of fraud, in my
opinion, the most infamous of any. Farewell.


