

WHILST I was despatching some public affairs, Sir, at my apartments in
Prusa, at the foot of Olympus, with the intention of leaving that city
the same day, the magistrate Asclepiades informed me that Eumolpus had
appealed to me from a motion which Cocceianus Dion made in their senate.
Dion, it seems, having been appointed supervisor of a public building,
desired that it might be assigned[1060] to the city in form. Eumolpus,
who was counsel for Flavius Archippus, insisted that Dion should first
be required to deliver in his accounts relating to this work, before it
was assigned to the corporation; suggesting that he had not acted in the
manner he ought. He added, at the same time, that in this building, in
which your statue is erected, the bodies of Dion's wife and son are
entombed,[1061] and urged me to hear this cause in the public court of
judicature. Upon my at once assenting to his request, and deferring my
journey for that purpose, he desired a longer day in order to prepare
matters for hearing, and that I would try this cause in some other city.
I appointed the city of Nicea; where, when I had taken my seat, the same
Eumolpus, pretending not to be yet sufficiently instructed, moved that
the trial might be again put off: Dion, on the contrary, insisted it
should be heard. They debated this point very fully on both sides, and
entered a little into the merits of the cause; when being of opinion
that it was reasonable it should be adjourned, and thinking it proper to
consult with you in an affair which was of consequence in point of
precedent, I directed them to exhibit the articles of their respective
allegations in writing; for I was desirous you should judge from their
own representations of the state of the question between them. Dion
promised to comply with this direction and Eumolpus also assured me he
would draw up a memorial of what he had to allege on the part of the
community. But he added that, being only concerned as advocate on behalf
of Archippus, whose instructions he had laid before me, he had no charge
to bring with respect to the sepulchres. Archippus, however, for whom
Eulnolpus was counsel here, as at Prusa, assured me he would himself
present a charge in form upon this head. But neither Eumolpus nor
Archippus (though I have waited several days for that purpose) have yet
performed their engagement: Dion indeed has; and I have annexed his
memorial to this letter. I have inspected the buildings in question,
where I find your statue is placed in a library, and as to the edifice
in which the bodies of Dion's wife and son are said to be deposited, it
stands in the middle of a court, which is enclosed with a colonnade.
Deign, therefore, I entreat you, Sir, to direct my judgment in the
determination of this cause above all others as it is a point to which
the public is greatly attentive, and necessarily so, since the fact is
not only acknowledged, but countenanced by many precedents.


