

As I know the humanity with which you treat your own servants, I have
less reserve in confessing to you the indulgence I shew to mine. I have
ever in my mind that line of Homer's --

"Who swayed his people with a father's love":

and this expression of ours, "father of a family." But were I harsher
and harder than I really am by nature, the ill state of health of my
freedman Zosimus (who has the stronger claim upon my tenderness, in that
he now stands in more especial need of it) would be sufficient to soften
me. He is a good, honest fellow, attentive in his services, and well-
read; but his chief talent, and indeed his distinguishing qualification,
is that of a comedian, in which he highly excels. His pronunciation is
distinct, correct in emphasis, pure, and graceful: he has a very skilled
touch, too, upon the lyre, and performs with better execution than is
necessary for one of his profession. To this I must add, he reads
history, oratory, and poetry, as well as if these had been the sole
objects of his study. I am the more particular in enumerating his
qualifications, to let you see how many agreeable services I receive
from this one servant alone. He is indeed endeared to me by the ties of
a long affection, which are strengthened by the danger he is now in. For
nature has so formed our hearts that nothing contributes more to incite
and kindle affection than the fear of losing the object of it: a fear
which I have suffered more than once on his account. Some years ago he
strained himself so much by too strong an exertion of his voice, that he
spit blood, upon which account I sent him into Egypt;[81] from whence,
after a long absence, belately returned with great benefit to his
health. But having again exerted himself for several days together
beyond his strength, he was reminded of his former malady by a slight
return of his cough, and a spitting of blood. For this reason I intend
to send him to your farm at Forum-Julii,[82] having frequently heard you
mention it as a healthy air, and recommend the milk of that place as
very salutary in disorders of his nature. I beg you would give
directions to your people to receive him into your house, and to supply
him with whatever he may have occasion for: which will not be much, for
he is so sparing and abstemious as not only to abstain from delicacies,
but even to deny himself the necessaries his ill state of health
requires. I shall furnish him towards his journey with what will be
sufficient for one of his moderate requirements, who is coming under
your roof. Farewell.


