

SOMETIMES I miss Regulus in our courts. I cannot say I deplore his loss.
The man, it must be owned, highly respected his profession, grew pale
with study and anxiety over it, and used to write out his speeches
though he could not get them by heart. There was a practice he had of
painting round his right or left eye,[86] and wearing a white patch[87]
over one side or the other of his forehead, according as he was to plead
either for the plaintiff or defendant; of consulting the soothsayers
upon the issue of an action; still, all this excessive superstition was
really due to his extreme earnestness in his profession. And it was
acceptable enough being concerned in the same cause with him, as he
always obtained full indulgence in point of time, and never failed to
get an audience together; for what could be more convenient than, under
the protection of a liberty which you did not ask yourself, and all the
odium of the arrangement resting with another, and before an audience
which you had not the trouble of collecting, to speak on at your ease,
and as long as you thought proper? Nevertheless Regulus did well in
departing this life, though he would have done much better had he made
his exit sooner. He might really have lived now without any danger to
the public, in the reign of a prince under whom he would have had no
opportunity of doing any harm. I need not scruple therefore, I think, to
say I sometimes miss him: for since his death the custom has prevailed
of not allowing, nor indeed of asking more than an hour or two to plead
in, and sometimes not above half that time. The truth is, our advocates
take more pleasure in finishing a cause than in defending it; and our
judges had rather rise from the bench than sit upon it: such is their
indolence, and such their indifference to the honour of eloquence and
the interest of justice! But are we wiser than our ancestors? are we
more equitable than the laws which grant so many hours and days of
adjournments to a case? were our forefathers slow of apprehension, and
dull beyond measure? and are we clearer of speech, quicker in our
conceptions, or more scrupulous in our decisions, because we get over
our causes in fewer hours than they took days? O Regulus! it was by zeal
in your profession that you secured an advantage which is but rarely
given to the highest integrity. As for myself, whenever I sit upon the
bench (which is much oftener than I appear at the bar), I always give
the advocates as much time as they require: for I look upon it as highly
presuming to pretend to guess, before a case is heard, what time it will
require, and to set limits to an affair before one is acquainted with
its extent; especially as the first and most sacred duty of a judge is
patience, which constitutes an important part of justice. But this, it
is objected, would give an opening to much superfluous matter: I grant
it may; yet is it not better to hear too much than not to hear enough?
Besides, how shall you know that what an advocate has farther to offer
will be superfluous, until you have heard him? But this, and many other
public abuses, will be best reserved for a conversation when we meet;
for I know your affection to the commonwealth inclines you to wish that
some means might be found out to check at least those grievances, which
would now be very difficult absolutely to remove. But to return to
affairs of private concern: I hope all goes well in your family; mine
remains in its usual situation. The good which I enjoy grows more
acceptable to me by its continuance; as habit renders me less sensible
of the evils I suffer. Farewell.


