

AFTER your late sacred father, Sir, had, in a noble speech, as well as
by his own generous example, exhorted and encouraged the public to acts
of munificence, I implored his permission to remove the several statues
which I had of the former emperors to my corporation, and at the same
time requested permission to add his own to the number. For as I had
hitherto let them remain in the respective places in which they stood
when they were left to me by several different inheritances, they were
dispersed in distant parts of my estate. He was pleased to grant my
request, and at the same time to give me a very ample testimony of his
approbation. I immediately, therefore, wrote to the decurii, to desire
they would allot a piece of ground, upon which I might build a temple at
my own expense; and they, as a mark of honour to my design, offered me
the choice of any site I might think proper. However, my own ill-health
in the first place, and later that of your father, together with the
duties of that employment which you were both pleased to entrust me,
prevented my proceeding with that design. But I have now, I think, a
convenient opportunity of making an excursion for the purpose, as my
monthly attendances ends on the 1st of September, and there are several
festivals in the month following. My first request, then, is that you
would permit me to adorn the temple I am going to erect with your
statue, and next (in order to the execution of my design with all the
expedition possible) that you would indulge me with leave of absence. It
would ill become the sincerity I profess, were I to dissemble that your
goodness in complying with this desire will at the same time be
extremely serviceable to me in my own private affairs. It is absolutely
necessary I should not defer any longer the letting of my lands in that
province; for, besides that they amount to above four hundred thousand
sesterces,[1006] the time for dressing the vineyards is approaching, and
that business must fall upon my new tenants.[1007] The unfruitfulness of
the seasons besides, for several years past, obliges me to think of
making some abatements in my rents; which I cannot possibly settle
unless I am present. I shall be indebted then to your indulgence, Sir,
for the expedition of my work of piety, and the settlement of my own
private affairs, if you will be pleased to grant me leave of
absence[1008] for thirty days. I cannot give myself a shorter time, as
the town and the estate of which I am speaking lie above a hundred and
fifty miles from Rome.


